# SALES-PERFORMANCE-ANALYSIS

## Project Description
I developed a comprehensive project in excel, with detailed tables with pivot tables and visualizations to analyze the sales performance of a company. This process includes a series of stages including data processing, data cleaning, descriptive statistics and visualisation.

## Project Objective
The sales performance data want to provide insights and recommendations to improve on revenue that dropped drastically between 2026 and 2027. The company will be able to make data-driven decisions about marketing and incorporating discounts from time to time to boost revenue.

## Data used
The data used for the work is gotten from www.kaggle.com
## EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This report analyses the sales performance of a company for 2024-2027.
Data cleaning took place where duplicates were removed from the data set, missing values were dealt with by use of mode in the quantity column and average was used in the revenue column where some values were missing. The rows with missing values under the product category column were deleted. The rows were deleted because when I calculated the percentage of the missing values, it was small compared to the data and it couldn’t cause any impact on the analysis. Standardization was done and the data was ready for analysis.
## KEY INSIGHTS INCLUDE:
•	Top Selling Product: Beauty products, contributing 22% of total revenue.
•	Underperforming product: Electronics with a decline in sales from 2025-2027
•	Best performing Region: East, with $280,680 which is 23.8% of total Revenue generated by the company.
•	Sales Channel performance: Online sales channel had the highest revenue in the four years.
Based on these findings, we recommend focusing more on digital marketing, improving in-store customer experience and adjusting pricing strategies.
## INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this report is to evaluate this company’s sales performance for years 2024-2027 and identify trends, challenges and opportunities.
Data was sourced from kaggle.com
The analysis focuses on sales performance by region, product category, channel, quantity and customer segment with recommendations for strategic improvements.
## SALES PERFORMANCE OVERVIEW
Total sales for 2024 were $363,308. In 2025 total revenue dropped slightly to $347,860(< by $15,448). In 2026, revenue increased to $361,877(> by $14,017) . In 2027 there was a $205,206 drop in revenue generating $105,371.
The drop in revenue might be due to the varying amounts of discounts offered to the customers. The years where higher discounts generated higher revenue as compared to 2027 when the discounts were significantly cut down.
## BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Data was sourced from www.kaggle.com. It was cleaned to remove duplicate, fill in the blanks within the columns. Microsoft Excel was used for data cleaning and data analysis. Pivot tables were created for the analysis. Charts were also created using Excel and an interactive dashboard created for the data.
## DATA ANALYSIS
** Data Source **
The data used for this work is gotten from www.kaggle.com. 
## KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
•	Total Revenue for the four years
•	Total revenue for each product category
•	Total revenue per sales channel
•	Total discount per year
•	Average revenue per transaction
•	Average discount per transaction
•	Identify leading sales channel
•	Identify best performing region
•	Identify top selling product
•	Identify underperforming product
•	Percentage of total revenue for each sales channel.
•	Percentage of total revenue for best performing region.
•	Total quantity sold per year
•	Percentage of top selling product
•	Percentage of underperforming product
## DATA CLEANING
•	Remove duplicates- there were no duplicates.
•	I noticed there were missing value on the quantity column, revenue column and product category column.
•	I used the IF and ISBLANK function in Excel.
•	I extracted years from dates by use of GROUP after creating a pivot table and dragging dates into rows. I right clicked on one of the dates and grouped the dates to years.
•	I used =AVG(selected revenue column) and clicked on ENTER
•	I used =MODE(selected quantity column) the ENTER
•	I deleted 50 rows with missing product category names because it was a small percentage compared to the data set I was using.
## SALES BREAKDOWN
a)	** Sales by product **
Best-selling product: Beauty products (24% of total revenue).
Underperforming product: Electronics (19% of the total Revenue).
b)	** Sales by region **
There was a decline in sales for all regions from 2026-2027 due to low discounts offered to the customers. There was a 31% decline in sales.

c)	** Sales by channel **
Online Sales: Accounted for 51% of total revenue.
In-store: Accounted for 49% of total revenue.

## Customer Analysis
There are three customer segments: VIP, Regular, New segment.
VIP segment Contributed 33.5% of total revenue.
Regular segment contributed 32.3% of total revenue.
New segment contributed 34.2% of total revenue.






## KEY INSIGHTS AND TRENDS
** Shift to online shopping **
Customers prefer online shopping over in-store sales. Online shopping contributed 51% while in-store contributed 49%.
 
** Product performance **
Beauty products generated good revenue across all years compared to other categories. It accounted for majority of the sales and revenue of $260,996 which is 22% of total revenue.
 
** Regional Performance **
East has the highest sales hence generating highest revenue of $280,680 which is 24% of the total revenue.
 
** Customer Segment Performance **
New customer segment contributed higher revenue of $402,249 (34.1% of total revenue) for the four years followed by VIP with total revenue of $395,022(which is 33.5% of the total revenue).
 
## CONCLUSION
2024 was a strong year for the company with revenue of $363,308 (30.8% of the total revenue for the company). However, challenges remain in in-store sales and certain product categories.
By focusing on digital market expansion, the company can sustain growth in the coming years.


## RECOMMENDATIONS AND INSIGHTS
1.	Increase investment in digital marketing to further boost online sales.
2.	Enhance in-store experience to counteract the decline in in-store sales.
3.	Discount offers played a big role in the high sales experienced in the first 3 years. The company should incorporate the discounts from time to time to increase sales.
